Hi everybody physics ninja here today I want to look at the potential the potential v that's created
from a charge disk.
So yeah I have a disk and I've placed the disk in the x y plane what I'm going to do that this is I'm
going to give it a uniform charge distribution.
So that's the Sigma over here.
And again this is going to be a constant charge distribution or we want to do now is I want to go above
this desk a certain distance in this case it's going to be denoted by the letter Z.
What I want to do is I want to calculate what is the potential V right here at this point.
Right.
And what happens then in the limit.
What happens at that point is very very far away from the disk.
What happens if it's very close to the disk.
What else can we calculate.
If I know the potential as a function of that letter Z I can also calculate what the electric field
is.
So what is the field when I'm close to this plate or if I'm very very far away from that plate.
So it's kind of a nice problem.
It's going to involve some integration because I have a uniform charge distribution.
So we're going to start by setting that up and then do all the rest of the calculations.
Okay.
So to get started when I'm first going to do is I'm going to consider a tiny little patch right here
in this little patch here has a charge which I'm going to denote as D Q some infinitesimal amount of
charge.
And I want to evaluate its contribution to the electrical potential at this point here point P which
is a high Z above this disk is disk allies in the x y plane.
Let's go ahead and just write this as that distance over here.
Now we have to define one more thing the distance now from the origin all the way to where this charges.
Let's call that our Prime Now.
You should be able to write that the distance from this little charge all the way to that point.
This is just using Pythagorean.
Nothing too complicated here it's our prime squared and plus Z squared.
All right.
Now we should be able to write an expression now for the potential produced by this little bit of charge
and I call that an infinitesimal potential because it's only the contribution from this little charge
at the end.
You'll have to integrate in order to get the total contribution.
So again this is simply D Q divided by four pi Epsilon 0 and the distance.
It's always the distance away from the charge to the point where I'm evaluating the so that distance
is what we just obtain helps get rid of that.
This is our prime squared.
And again plus Z squared.
All right.
So that's it.
It looks like that's it.
The only thing I have to do now is I have to add all the contributions so we have to do one more step
here.
What is this little element of charge.
Well there's a little element of charge is going to be my charge density multiplied by the area.
So let's take this equation one step further.
This is my charged my charge density and multiplied by the area call it D.A. and again the bottom now
is just stays the exact same for Pi Epsilon 0.
And again square root of the rest of this term are prime squared plus Z squared.
Okay to get the total potential which is really what I'm after to get the total potential what you have
to do now is we have to integrate and we're gonna have to integrate the expressions like this in order
to add up all the contributions to get the total potential and that here is only going to be a function
of Z for this particular problem.
Okay.
So let's evaluate this integral we're doing we're working in cylindrical coordinate systems so the potential
as a function of V.
Let's take out all the constant term so you should have a charge density which pops out the other terms
that pop out are gonna be this for Pi the Epsilon 0.
Now I could write out the integral.
Now there's two integrals because I'm integrating over the total area of this disk and in cylindrical
coordinates the integral goes from 0 to 2 pi.
That's for the angle theta.
And I also want to integrate over the total radius so that I'll go from zero all the way to uppercase
R.
That's the radius of this disk and that's it.
Now here I'm going to replace this little element of area again the little element of area for the cylindrical
coordinates can always be written as our prime D.R. prime.
And again I've already got the D theta here.
So maybe let me just explicitly write this down here that the area can also be written as D.R. times
are prime and multiplied by D theta.
Okay.
That's where this whole substitution over here came in so don't worry about that.
And again at the end we're still left with this term here in the denominator in the denominator.
I still have this square root term which is our prime squared and plus Z squared.
Okay so this looks like a nasty expression.
The first term however this is pretty straightforward since there is no other dependents on the angle
theta over here.
The integral from 0 to 2 pi of D theta simply gives me 2 pi.
So let's go ahead and simplify this even more
so we get our charged distribution sigma.
We get the 4 pi Epsilon 0 this first integral let's just write is this this is going to be 2 pi.
And now the final integral will go in the next page in just a second here.
But this is really at the heart of the problem.
The square root of our prime squared plus Z squared.
Notice you can cancel out 2 pi and cancel out your left with a 2 here at the bottom.
Okay so now let's go on the next page and I'll show you how to evaluate this second term over here.
The second integral over the total radius to get our final expression for the potential All right.
So to evaluate the second term here what you have to do is you can either look it up in an integral
table.
This one is actually pretty straightforward.
We could do just this substitution.
I'm going to do a substitution or I'm going to define you as our prime squared plus Z squared.
Now if I make that substitution that means that the limits now of the integral have to change right
instead of going from 0 to are the limits the new limits here are going to be while the lower limit
is you substitute the zero for the R prime so you have Z squared and the upper limit is you're going
to have uppercase r squared plus Z squared.
So those are our new limits of integration.
Now the other thing I have to do now is I have to differentiate this.
That means that do you mind if I differentiate that with respect to r what you end up getting here the
second term is is just acts as a constant because I'm not differentiating with respect to the letter
Z.
What you're left with here is simply to our prime.
Now that doesn't quite look like the top term so we have to just rearrange it a little bit if you rearrange
a little bit what you're going to find here is that if I have our prime D.R. prime.
That should be equal to D you over too.
OK so now we go ahead and we make the substitution and this is what you should end up with that my potential.
At least the integral can be written as the first terms don't change.
These are only constant terms.
Now I'm changing I've made a change of variable over here so what I'm changing now is I'm going to integrate
all the way from Z squared all the way to our squared plus Z squared.
Okay.
Now we make these substitution for all of these terms over here.
So the are prime D.R. prime Well that gets substituted by this guy right here.
So that simply becomes do you divide it by two.
All right.
Now here I'm still dividing by the square root of this term.
And now one term is pretty easy.
So I'm gonna have the square root of you.
OK.
Now this is getting pretty straightforward now actually this integral right here is one that's pretty
straightforward.
So let's go on the other page and evaluate this and get to our final expression for the potential.
OK.
So this is pretty straightforward at this point all we have to do is maybe pull out the to bring that
to the front and then we're left with a very very simple in a row.
But let me just do one intermediate step for you over for Epsilon 0.
Again this are still going to be the same limits I'm not going to rewrite them over here.
And what you're left with here is d you divided by square root of you.
And that term is pretty straightforward All right.
I always like to write it off for me my personal preference here is just the right it is you to the
minus one half right.
That's exactly what this term is.
And the integral now with respect to do you.
All right.
So this you should be able to just write this down.
Right.
This is kind of a standard function so we get over for Epsilon 0.
All right.
Now this guy here is again you add 1.
So we're going to have you to the.
If you add one to negative 1 1/2 you're left with one 1/2 and you also have to divide by that term by
the same term.
So we get this and again this is evaluated now between the limits of Z squared and r squared plus Z
squared.
So all we have to do now is simply substitute those limits into this expression and we'll have our final
expression for the potential one thing I could simplify over here this too can cancel out.
I could take two out of there and I'm left with this.
All right.
One last step.
We get to our final expression.
Let's do it so I'm left with.
Now just substituting those limits Sigma over to Epsilon 0 remains the same.
Now again if you substitute our squared Plaza squared into here and write it in kind of a slightly different
form over here let's write that one half as a square root.
And here I am left with our squared plus Z squared.
So it depends on how far away you are.
All right.
That makes sense and also on the dimensions of the disk that almost also makes sense.
And don't forget to substitute this lower limit here because we did a change of variable over here.
OK.
So we have something like this.
The other thing you can do now is I mean you could simplify this a little bit if I wanted to factor
out a Z.
I could do that.
So let's go ahead here and that would look like Sigma over to Epsilon 0.
Now if you take out a z over here again imagine the Z is above the desk or if it's below the disk you're
going to get the same potential.
Right.
It's going to be some positive value of the potential and you could see that this is always going to
be a positive value right.
There is nothing in this term here again assuming that the charge density is positive.
But this first term is always going to be bigger than the second term.
All right if I factor out a Z I'm going to just going to write that as absolute value of Z.
What you're left with now in the bracket is again if you factor out Z squared from the square root you'll
end up have an absolute value of z over here.
So the first term will look like this just change the order a little bit.
This will be R over Z squared make sure you can kind of understand that step.
And again this is gonna be minus one.
You're going to see why in a minute that I kind of like this form over here.
All right.
So this is the value or a function of the potential as a function of the value z.
I want to examine this this equation here on the next page and we're going to take some limits here.
Like what happens if I'm really really far away from the desk and how can I use this expression for
example to calculate the electric field.
But we've done all the work.
This is really the final expression.
Let's go on the next page just to make sure this expression makes sense physically all right.
So here's our expression that we've gotten this is a general expression here I haven't made any simplifications
to this expression.
This is just what the math gave us what the calculus gave us.
So it looks like a rather complicated expression however now I want to exploit limit.
It's always a good idea to explore limits when you get to algebraic expressions like this.
So the first one is what happens now if I'm really really far away right.
And that means what happens if Z is much much bigger than the radius.
Think about it.
So you have a disk in front of you and you go to a distance that's really really far away.
First of all the potential should be small.
And we're going to find that however how does the potential vary.
If you're really really far away from a disk Well if you're really really far away from something that
looks like this it probably looks like a point.
So our result here which doesn't look like a point charge it should reduce to that of the point charge
when I'm far away from it.
So let's go ahead and make this make this verification.
So when you're far away what I'm gonna do here is first look at this time.
All right.
If Z is bigger than R that means that this term over here that's going to end up getting squared is
going to be a small term.
So let's first look at what that term looks like in this limit.
This term over here which is square root of 1 plus are over overseas squared.
Let's get rid of this don't need that that there is approximately going to be equal to.
Let me write it out as one extra step first.
Some people may not know this right.
This is just using kind of a binomial expansion.
Let me just write as one plus R over Z again this term here is squared.
And this is really to the 1 1/2 right in the limit of Z much bigger than R.
This here becomes approximately equal to one plus one half are overseas squared.
Now there's higher order terms but we're just going to keep those terms.
Now if you completely neglected this term if you say that disease is really really big well then you
might just completely get rid of this one and then you would have one under the square root minus one
and that would give you zero.
Well that really doesn't give you any functional dependence over here so we're gonna keep these first
two terms for this expansion.
All right let's have a look now of what we end up getting.
So we get Sigma over to Epsilon 0 absolute value of Z and now this whole term you now the one is going
to cancel with this one here again we can write out the whole square bracket but we have one plus one
half.
This is our squared over Z squared and minus one close the bracket.
All right.
This will cancel with this.
Now what you're left with over here is again this too I can bring it out to the front.
Let's write down all the terms over here.
So we have our charge density the charge density here you can really write as the total charge.
That total charge of the disk is going to be some value Q and divided by the total radius and total
radius saw the total area of the disk which is simply power squared.
Okay.
So if you go ahead and do this let's get rid of the charge density here and write it out as Q and divided
by higher squared.
Now this too is going to combine this one right here.
That's going to combine to a four.
All right what else do we have the other terms here as I have a z up here and I have Z squared over
here.
So this guy here can cancel with one of those.
You'll notice that the absolute values are also taking care of here in the last part here is I simply
have an R squared that's left over right here.
So that term has to stay and I'm also going to have just one Z here in the denominator.
Notice the R squares cancel.
Now if you're a little bit careful we group all the terms together what you're left with is the total
charge of that disk divided by four pi and there is a Z here in the denominator and that there's the
potential and that just looks exactly like the potential produced by a point charge that has a value
Q and if I'm a certain distance Z away from it.
So this here totally checks out right that one there makes sense physically.
So when you're really really far away this whole disk just acts like a point charge and now you can
also calculate the electric field and you'll get to the standard expression.
All right in the second case what I want to do now is what happens now if I'm really close I'm really
close to the desk again.
If I look at my general expression that's OK and this limit here Z is going to be much smaller than
R.
I don't want to said Z equal to zero I'm just going to be above it by some small value.
So that looks like well in this case here if I look at the term in the square root if Z is small that
means that the second term here is going to be pretty big and it's going to be much bigger than the
one.
So in that case here I could just neglect the one term over here and what you're left with is that my
potential is going to look like this
Sesay OK.
Now you can cancel out the one here forget about that term this second term is much bigger and it's
squared and if that's under the square root again what we're gonna be left with here is are over ze
and again minus one again that's what the square root term simplifies to and the limit that Z is much
smaller than R.
Now if you carry out this multiplication over here what you're left with is this term.
Again I'll just multiply through by this absolute value of Z and what you're left with here is ah again
minus Z she does this makes sense to you.
So you have to ask yourself right.
This first term here what is this first term represent.
It's simply a constant term.
That's actually the potential of the disk.
All right.
If I'm right on the desk and then what does this tell you.
The second term over here tells me that it varies linearly with distance from the disk.
Right.
This is a linear term.
And does that makes sense.
Well think about it what if now if you wanted to evaluate what was the electric field.
How would I evaluate the electric field if I'm really close to the disk.
Right the electric field you should be the right as the derivative of the potential with respect to
my variable here.
Now with respect to D.C..
All right.
If you take the derivative and let's just assume that here we're above this desk so you don't have to
really worry about the absolute value and what you end up getting here in this case would be that the
electric field the first term if you differentiate it with respect to Z you get zero.
This negative sign will cancel with this one right here.
So that off the worry about those and if you take the derivative of Z with respect to Z you're simply
going to get one in the value of the electric feel that you get is going to be Sigma divided by two
Epsilon zero right.
This is the electric field just above the surface of the disk.
And that's exactly what you would get if you would use something called Gauss law goes as law is often
used to calculate fields close to objects and you get the same result.
So if we're gonna sketch now what this potential looks like again these are the results for the two
limits.
Far away we have a potential basically due to a point charge and Q Was the total charge of the disk
when you're kind of close to the desk if you're really close to something it basically just looks like
an infinite flat surface.
It's not really infinite in this case it does have a finite size.
So what you have here is a potential that drops linearly with distance away from the disk.
Okay.
And that also reduces to an electric field that's more or less constant.
Right.
It's very little dependence on the distance if you're close to it for the electric field.
Now if we we're going to make a sketch of what V looks like as a function of distance it would look
something like this.
So in this first section it would be linear.
And the term here has a negative slope.
So it goes down and then eventually it starts kind of dropping dropping dropping.
And when you're far away again it looks like one over Z one over Z down in this area right here when
you're far away from it.
And when you're close to adhere it's linear and the dependence is basically minus right some negative
slope because it's dropping and the value right over here again.
I second calculate that is simply this first term over here when Z equals zero.
So the value right here is some constant value.
This is basically what V.S. is.
All right.
So that's what the potential looks like for a finite sized disk as a function of distance from that
disk.
And again here I'm just doing the calculation when I'm on the axis which is the easiest case.